[AUDIO LOGO]
[THEME MUSIC]
>> Hello again, and
welcome to episode 2.
So in the last
episode, we delved
into the main concepts
of the Gene Keys,
and we took a first
look at our profile.
And we also started to explore
the layers of our Life's Work
Gene Key.
Now I'd like to
continue that and begin
working more deeply
with our profile
and exploring its
first sequence.
And the way this works is that
we take each of the Gene Keys
in our profile.
We contemplate them and then
apply them in our everyday life.
And as we do this, a
process of transformation
gradually begins to occur.
This is a journey of awakening.
As we follow the algorithms
of the specific Gene Keys that
are hardwired into us, it's like
a cosmic kind of acupuncture
as we hit each point.
And there's a logic to it.
We follow the sequence
of the different pathways
in our profile, starting with
the Gene Key of our Life's Work
and then along the
Pathway of Challenge
into the sphere of Evolution.
And then we contemplate that
sphere and its Gene Key.
And then we follow
the next pathway
called Breakthrough, which leads
to the sphere of our Radiance.
And finally, we follow the
Pathway of Core Stability.
And we end by contemplating
the Gene Key of our Purpose.
So you can see, when we take
this first journey into our Gene
Keys, it's going to set
the stage for some kind
of a breakthrough in our lives.
And this whole journey through
your four primary Gene Keys
is called the
Activation Sequence.
And it's the first of a series
of sequences that make up
what we call the Golden Path.
And moving through
these sequences
might take many
months or even years
because contemplation
takes time.
After all, we're
transforming our inner life.
We're doing alchemy.
And this isn't just
about studying.
This is a journey
of self-reflection
that you can dip
into and out of.
So you might find that you
put it down for a while,
and it almost disappears into
the background of your life.
But then you spontaneously
pick it up again,
and then you'll find
yourself having perhaps
one of these breakthroughs.
And each time you get to a
new sphere and a new Gene Key,
you wait until you've
had a really good insight
about yourself in that sphere.
And each time you experience
one of these openings
or an expansion, you
have to integrate it,
and you have to soften into
it, and then you move on.
And I call this process
self-illumination,
because you're being
lit up with the wisdom
as it detonates inside you.
So if you have your
profile in front of you,
you'll see the
first two spheres--
your Life's Work at the top,
your Evolution on the right.
And they're joined together
by the Pathway of Challenge.
And this pathway is
really the beginning
of your Gene Key's journey.
And it always begins
with a challenge.
So take a look at the two
words for your shadows
in these two spheres and
see how they interact.
And you'll see that there's
a story hidden here that's
all about the core
issues of your life.
This is what we call
a shadow pattern.
It's a difficulty or a challenge
that won't go away easily.
And it's a story that can be
multilayered and intricate.
And in the beginning,
this shadow work
can be tough because
we're going down
into the underworld
of our unconscious
to retrieve the gift, the
light, and bring it back out
into the world and use
it to transform our life.
And this is the purpose
of the Gene Keys.
So what really is this shadow?
It's actually not really a
thing that lives inside you.
It's more like a radio signal.
It's a frequency that we
can get stuck in whenever
we believe that we're a victim.
So it's a constricted
viewpoint or a mindset
that prevents love and
wisdom from flowing easily
and clearly through our being.
So just close your
eyes for a moment
and think about the current
challenges in your life.
Perhaps you're facing a health
crisis or a relationship issue.
Maybe it's a fear about
the global breakdown.
Or it could be stress around
money or a lack of purpose.
For some of us, it
might be loneliness,
or it could be
anxiety, or someone
you love being in a crisis,
and you don't know what to do.
So as you're tuning into
the biggest challenge you're
facing in your life right now,
remember that you're not alone
and that we all have these
difficulties in our lives
and that we all experience
similar sufferings, just
in different forms.
So our pain can actually
bring us together.
And just take this moment to
contemplate the difficulty
that you're dealing
with right now.
Well, perhaps you're
not dealing with it yet.
Maybe it's too scary,
and that's also fine.
That's totally understandable.
Only you know what
this thing is.
And as you turn with courage to
face this challenge, somewhere
deep inside your being,
inside your body,
you might feel a little tremor
or a difference in your energy
as you open yourself up to
accept this challenge a bit
more deeply.
And then when you're
ready, just open your eyes
and take a look at your profile.
And look at your sphere of
evolution and the three words
next to it.
And I want you to look at
the word for the shadow
because it may well
help you to unravel
the story around this current
difficulty in your life.
It's always the same archetype.
It just manifests
in different ways,
so understanding
this shadow is going
to be an integral
part of your journey.
And in this series, we're
going to go deep into it
together and touch
aspects of our lives
that aren't touched very often.
So this can be a very
therapeutic and quite a tender
journey, and I want you
to be ready for that.
Remember, we use the
language of the Gene Keys
to help us reprogram and
rethink the way we see things
so that we can start to
accept ourselves more deeply.
And then our heart
begins to open,
and we can embrace
more of our suffering.
And then paradoxically,
our genius
starts to emerge
from that shadow.
So it's a really
powerful process.
So going back to the two
spheres of your Life's Work
and your Evolution, let's
see how those two shadows
connect with each other.
And here I've got
a good example.
This is the profile of
the late Queen Elizabeth.
And you can see that her Life's
Work is Gene Key 3, which
is the shadow of chaos,
and her evolution
is Gene Key 50, which is
the shadow of corruption.
So we have corruption
and chaos, both really
powerful and difficult
words and words we generally
not want to apply to ourselves.
But one of the things you'll
learn about the Gene Keys,
these are global words.
These are collective of terms.
So it's not that Queen
Elizabeth or you--
if you happen to
have the same keys--
are corrupt or chaotic beings.
It's that you're going to meet
that frequency in your life.
So these are simply
archetypal energies
that you're going to
have to deal with.
But those two shadows
of chaos and corruption
actually make sense when you
really think about the queen
and you think about
some of the things
that she had to deal with over
the course of her long life.
One of the hardest
things for any parent
is to watch their
children suffer,
to see the chaos of their
emotional lives falling apart,
and the disappointment and
the breakdown of their dreams.
And this chaos was
something that the queen
had to go through many
times in her life.
And as for the
shadow of corruption,
for her, this was more about
the corrupting of the values
and principles that she held and
seeing that they weren't being
upheld by younger generations.
Not that she was morally
superior or anything like that,
but she must have found it
very challenging to navigate.
>> A queen, newly crowned,
accompanied by her husband.
>> Being part of the generation
who came out of the second World
War, and she had to embrace this
challenge and evolve because her
children's and other people's
values were so different from
hers.
So remember that the words
for your shadows aren't you.
It's just that they
influence your narrative,
the story of your life when
you tune into their frequency.
And when you start to
contemplate your Gene Keys,
I guarantee you, you will see
your life story, your mythology,
written here.
And when you see the story
of your shadow playing out,
it's both painful, but it's
also incredibly liberating
because we all have
one of these stories.
And the trick, the real
trick, is how we deal with it.
And one question I often
get asked is, why do we
have to go through so much
shadow, so much difficulty
in our lives?
Why does it have to be so hard?
And it's such a poignant
and tender question.
I think it's a very
brave question to ask.
It's brave to accept the shadow
because it has layer upon layer.
And there's no quick fix to it.
But the answer to why
is there so much shadow,
it perhaps lies
in this one word--
evolution.
We are here to evolve.
And if we're really honest
about our shadow patterns
and we take
responsibility for them,
then we begin to transform
them and empower ourselves.
And then we go on to discover
that these dark lumps
of black coal actually have
diamonds hidden inside them.
So the queen, you can
also see her gifts here.
The gift of innovation
and the gift of innocence.
So for her to get back
to that innocence,
she has to really go
deep into that chaos
and begin to innovate and adjust
her value system so that she
can begin to rise above
the frequency of chaos
and transcend all
those difficulties.
Perhaps all she ever really
wanted was a simple life,
and that was her innocence.
And it's the same
with corruption.
The higher frequency
of corruption
is the gift of equilibrium
and the siddhi of harmony.
So by maintaining
her equilibrium
and trying to keep things
balanced in her life,
she could find her
way to harmony.
And she tried to hold that
inner balance all her life,
and she did her best to
maintain it for the collective.
So regardless of what you
think of the monarchy,
the process of dealing with
our shadows is universal,
but it's also deeply
personal for each of us,
just as it was for the queen.
So the purpose of all of
this is for us to discover
the gift in the shadow.
And then we've made the gold.
And that's our alchemy.
So I'd like to pause just
for a moment with the profile
and explore another
idea that might help
us to understand all of this.
We've all heard of the
theory of evolution.
And I want to invite you now
to see evolution as a current,
like an ocean current
of evolving energy.
And we're all caught
up in this current.
And over time, it's
pulling us from believing
that we're separate,
individuated beings
towards an understanding
of ourselves
as a more coherent, integrated,
higher-level consciousness.
We're all actually
one being, one entity,
but we each color the ocean
with our own uniqueness
in all kinds of beautiful
and powerful ways.
And on the other side,
there's another current,
and it's known as the
current of involution.
And this is a notion that's
held by many cultures,
ancient cultures, that there
is a divine higher frequency,
a unified field that is
gradually stepping itself down
so that it can embody itself
in the form, in the body.
So you have one current
evolving upwards
from matter towards spirit,
learning and growing
through suffering.
And then you have the other
current involving downwards
from spirit into matter.
And what's interesting here
is that if you're looking only
from the viewpoint of
the evolving current,
then all you see is choices
because we have free will,
and we can decide this,
and we can decide that,
and we can keep learning and
evolving through the choices
we make.
But on the other side, through
the lens of involution,
everything is seen and
known at a unified level.
So everything, in a sense,
has already occurred.
So from the viewpoint
of involution,
there is no free will.
There's only
predestination because
in the timeless dimension of
the divine, there is no time,
and there is no
chooser, so there
can't be any choice either.
And from this
involutionary perspective,
it's like we're part of a big
tapestry that we're weaving.
And the ancients
called it dharma,
which is the destiny, the flow,
the plan, the weave of your life
and the life of the whole.
And we're all moving
gradually in time
towards this coherent,
unified moment when
one day, we arrive back at our
source and know ourselves fully.
Then we're awakened.
We're enlightened.
And the whole is
enlightened as well.
So when you look at this through
the involutionary current,
it helps us to understand
these siddhies, those highest
energies that are waiting
to emerge from inside us.
And it's why the mystics say
that you're already enlightened.
Or it's like Christ saying
that the kingdom of heaven
is already within you.
And this involutionary
view, it also
helps us to understand
why we have the shadow
because the shadow is the
raw material that we're here
to transform into the
gift and the siddhi,
while at the same time, the
grace of the higher self
is trying to come down
into the form to transform
the shadow back into the light.
It's like that old saying
where God or the divine
is looking for you just as
hard as you're looking for it.
So evolution is all about how
we respond to our challenges
and how we grow and create more
love, more beauty, and more
intimacy.
And involution is how we can
tap into the higher frequencies
through revelation, through
contemplation, and meditation.
And as we tune into
these higher frequencies,
so they begin to work inside us.
And one day, we have our
greatest breakthrough.
We begin to trust
in our suffering,
and we stop turning
away from it.
So we need both views.
We have to strive, and
we have to surrender.
We strive to
transform the shadow
from the evolutionary
view until we
meet the grace of the
involutionary view.
And then we have to surrender
and let it transform us.
It's a wonderful,
paradoxical dance.
So the only way we can
heal our inner self
is by going on the
spiritual journey.
And it's a warrior's journey.
And this is how we really
work with our Gene Keys,
by becoming shadow
hunters, warriors of light.
So how do we do it?
How do we truly
transform our shadows?
Well, to give you
an example, I'm
going to talk just a little
bit about my own profile.
You'll see the Gene Keys of
my Life's Work and Evolution,
and you can see here that
I have the shadows of doubt
and confusion.
And shadows kind of
often hunt in pairs.
And your Life's
Work and Evolution
always operate together.
So take a look at yours, and
you might see a similar pattern.
It's really a single dynamic,
a kind of negative biofeedback
loop.
So I used to have a huge
amount of self-doubt.
And then when I began to
receive all this wisdom,
it just increased my
self-doubt exponentially.
So I was deeply confused.
But the beauty is that
the shadow of doubt
contains the gift of inquiry.
And so the inquiry transformed
the doubt into my inner journey
towards truth--
that's the siddhi--
so that one day,
I arrived at truth by
following my doubt.
And you can see here the
magic of a Gene Key--
doubt, inquiry, truth.
And out of this came my inquiry
into every single Gene Key
to understand my own doubt
so that I could resolve it.
And you might think that
that's a bit extreme,
but I needed to know.
And as I explored
and inquired, a gift
emerged from within
each Gene Key,
which began to settle my
doubt and bring me out
of my confusion.
And out of all that came
this whole body of wisdom.
And then out of that came my
book, The Gene Keys, which
is all about illumination.
That's the siddhi,
my 64th siddhi.
So I'm an example of how
enormous creativity can emerge
out of the shadow when
we summon the courage
to really lean into it.
But I want to get
back for a moment
to the art of contemplation, the
central technique of the Gene
Keys.
And you might remember
that I invited
you to start a practice of
pausing in your daily life.
And I'd like to put a
bit more flesh on this
so that you can understand how
such a small thing can have such
a profound and widespread
effect in your life
because when we pause, we
create a spaciousness inside us.
And in that space, we come into
presence with the frequencies
that we are attuning
to at any given moment.
So when we pause, we become
aware of the quantum environment
that we're creating around us.
That's our thoughts, our
breathing, our feelings.
And this is often where we
meet the shadow, when we pause.
And then we realize
that we're actually
feeling anxious or uneasy.
So we listen to that,
and we remind ourselves
that this is just a frequency
that we're attuning to.
And then we can change
it quite easily.
I always remember Ram Dass, a
wonderful spiritual teacher,
speaking about his
various neuroses
and how he would
invite them in for tea.
Ah, addiction, come on in.
Pull up a seat.
Have a cup of tea.
Ah, exhaustion, come and
lie down here by the fire.
Ooh, anxiety, let me
give you a massage.
Have a cup of tea.
And this is how we start to
transform that shadow energy.
We make a space for it,
and then we allow it in.
And there are three main stages
to transforming the shadow
through contemplation.
And they're called allowing,
accepting, and embracing.
So this is the first
stage, allowing.
And allowing doesn't mean that
you have to like the shadow.
You can hate it.
You can be angry.
You can feel any
energy that you want.
You can feel utterly numb.
Whatever that energy
is, you just allow it.
So allowing is very
generous and very passive,
and it's very powerful.
Acceptance.
Acceptance isn't easy.
It isn't something
that happens quickly.
It's like taming a wild horse.
You may have to wait a long time
with your hands stretched out.
Have you ever seen a
horse whisperer do that?
They can wait for hours
and hours for that horse.
And eventually, there's
this magical moment
when the horse suddenly
realizes that they're not
going to quit on him.
It's a profound moment.
And then he surrenders.
And that's how you build
trust, through deep patience
and gentleness.
So after this first
stage of allowing,
we begin to see how that shadow
has been conditioning us.
And we shift into the
second stage of accepting.
Acceptance is when
the gift begins
to emerge from the shadow.
Kinetic energy is
released from what
was a blocked cellular channel
somewhere in our system.
And there are powerful
health benefits
to this process because
it's in our subtle energy
network, our meridian
system, that these shadow
blockages occur.
And they can remain
blocked for years.
And it's quite something when
all of a sudden, they open up.
And energies can suddenly
rush through our body,
and old pains and problems
can subside overnight,
all because we fully
accepted a shadow.
And in fact, these
physical openings
really occur at the third
stage, which we call embracing.
So with embracing, you're
in an even deeper stage when
you've completely
accepted the difficulty,
and then you let go of it.
And this is something that
happens spontaneously.
It just suddenly drops off you.
An enormous joy can
suddenly flow through you
as though for no reason, or
a sense of awe, or perhaps
some deep grief might come
out, or some long-hidden trauma
from when we were young, all
just from creating the space so
that the shadow could breathe.
So working with the Gene
Keys and with this process
of contemplation and
inquiry can really
dismantle some of the
deep and difficult issues
that we carry inside us.
I think this might be a nice
moment to take to pause.
And I thought I'd share a
little transmission with you
about the code
behind the Gene Keys
and where it all comes from.
So this is a few minutes
for the left brain.
So we know that the Gene Keys
are 64 universal attributes
of consciousness.
They're contemplative archetypes
that are inspired by our DNA
and by the I Ching and another
system of self-knowledge
called human design.
And each Gene Key is a
multidimensional portal
into your inner being that's
designed to activate your higher
purpose and, ultimately,
that can allow you to embrace
your own inner divinity.
And when I was
writing The Gene Keys,
I originally recorded the
chapters, first as audios,
and then I spent many years
deeply contemplating them.
And they're a map of
human consciousness,
but they can also be
understood at other levels.
So for example, you
can see not just
how individuals are wired
to go through this process
of ascension, but
entire gene pools
are also moving through
these transformations.
So they help show us that the
transformation is everywhere.
It's going on
everywhere all the time.
So each Gene Key is also
part of a wider code,
a huge genetic clock of cycles.
And the Chinese discovered this
incredible code and laid it out
in the teaching of the I
Ching with its 64-fold matrix.
So the Gene Keys are a new
rendition of the I Ching
and a mechanism to
decipher our reality
through this pattern of the 64.
And we find this magic
number all over the place.
It's in our DNA,
which has 64 codons.
We find it in the
eight octaves of music.
It's hardwired into the 64-bit
technology of our computer
systems.
It's there in physics.
It's in the tetrahedral
geometry that
may underlie space time itself.
The 64 is also seen in the
architecture of life forms
and the phi spiral
and the golden ratio.
It's a mathematical
correlation that is
spread throughout the universe.
And every Gene Key has a
relationship to our DNA,
to the amino acids, and
to the correspondences
between the amino acids,
which we call codon rings.
But the Gene Keys also
have correspondences
with the stars and
the constellations
and their positions
in the cosmos,
along with the
organs in our bodies
and even with our mythologies.
So let's return to our
profile because it's
your profile that has the
particular gift of awakening
your individual mythic story.
And just as the great
mythologist Joseph Campbell
entreated us to
follow our bliss,
we'll be following the path
to our siddhies, those highest
words which represent our bliss.
And our bliss is written
and stamped in our DNA.
It's just completely
dormant in most of us.
We're like sleeping Buddhas.
So we'll finish by looking
at the profile of Yogananda,
the great spiritual teacher who
brought many Eastern teachings
to the West, including yoga.
And you may know his book,
Autobiography of a Yogi,
where he recounts many
stories about his life
and his spiritual development.
So Yogananda, we
can see here, has
Gene Keys 54 and 53 as his
Life's Work and his Evolution.
So Gene Key 54, represents the
kundalini, the serpent path.
And it starts with the shadow
of greed or material ambition,
and it shifts into
its higher frequency
as the gift of aspiration.
So we could look
around the world,
and we could see all
the people with Gene Key
54 driven by the shadow
of materialistic ambition.
And Yogananda started with
that same energy, that code,
but he decided to stand
against that greed.
And he was able to transform
it into spiritual aspiration,
the gift.
And finally, one day,
Yogananda took it all the way.
And then greed became ascension
when he realized his oneness
with the divine.
And his Evolution, this
is immaturity to expansion
to superabundance.
So his journey transformed his
immaturity into inner expansion,
and he expanded his
awareness through meditation
and yogic discipline.
And this is an example of
how our Evolution turns
our suffering into our genius.
From the challenges of life
comes this expansion of service.
And now, people
all over the world
have access to yogic
teachings that support them
in their everyday lives.
That's the superabundance
of love in action.
So take a good look at your Gene
Keys in these first two spheres.
And take courage and
accept the challenge
of transforming your own shadows
through the power of your heart.
And take some time to
contemplate and learn more
about those shadows.
And pay special attention to
your gifts, and especially
those higher, transcendent
siddhies that you have.
And try and see
yourself as Yogananda
saw himself through
the eyes of his master.
And keep reminding yourself that
you have an incredible power
asleep inside you.
And then you'll slowly
start to feel it waking up,
and your life will begin
to change all around you
as that involutionary
energy of grace touches
you in all kinds
of magical ways.
And let's never again forget
that every shadow contains
a gift because that single,
simple revelation can utterly
change our lives.
Next time, we'll be looking at
DNA through the eyes of a mystic
and finding out how it can
program human consciousness.
And we'll also learn what true
radiance looks and feels like
and how our sphere of radiance
can keep us healthy and glowing
from the inside out.